Groundwater conservation and management: Recent trends and future prospects

Abstract
In regions with sparse in situ monitoring and forecasting, water resources management (WRM) for sustainable development poses several challenges. Over the last decade, the rapid increase of satellite-based information has brought unprecedented ways to support and strengthen WRM. Moreover, traditional barriers to satellite data availability and use are eroding as technological advancements open better ways to manage and convey this wealth of evidence to a larger audience. We look at the data requirements for WRM and the importance that satellite remote sensing can compete in filling gaps and improving WRM, with an emphasis on developed and developing countries as an instance of a region with the prospects to further establish its resources while mitigating the effects of hydrological hazards. We talk about the prospects of recently launched, future ones, and suggested missions to improve and transform water resource management and analysis. To best leverage the functionality of satellite-based information for enhancing WRM, ongoing issues of accuracy, sampling, and consistency must be discussed, as well as additional challenges associated to tremendous amounts of new data.

19.1. Introduction
Water resources are becoming increasingly vulnerable across the world as a result of rising demand due to population expansion, the need for more food production, expanding industry due to higher living standards, pollution from different human activities, and climate change impacts (Manisalidis et al., 2020). The number of areas with a stable groundwater balance is dwindling all over the world. Groundwater is essential for the survival of rivers, lakes, wetlands, and ecological systems because it compensates 99% of the world's liquid fresh water (Dodds et al., 2019). However, because groundwater is tucked away beneath the land surface, few people see it. Groundwater use is dominated by three issues: depletion of groundwater because of over exploitation; waterlogging and salinization due to inadequate drainage and concurrent use; and contamination due to agricultural, industrial, as well as other anthropogenic activities (Shah et al., 2000). It is estimated that by 2050, one in every four people would live in a nation with a freshwater deficit due to the shortage and poor water quality. As a result, the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals, Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, have included guaranteeing water access to safe and affordable management as one of the goals.
Weathering and geomorphologic procedures influence the earth's surface. Rivers, lakes, and wetlands are surface manifestations of groundwater that exchange flow with the groundwater reservoir that continues to feed them when they need water and tends to take some of their flow when there is an enormous amount of surface water (Leibowitz et al., 2018). Groundwater is a massive, slow-moving reservoir of freshwater resources (in its shallower arenas) that forms complexes with earth materials along its channel flow and interactions with river and atmosphere water transportation networks. This massive groundwater reservoir needs to serve as a: (1) fresh water hydrologic cycle controller by facilitating the flow of continental rivers and streams, (2) a chemical factory and conveyor belt for accessing Earth's material and transporting it from continents to oceans, (3) a waste repository/processing plant, and (4) a worldwide life support system.
Water scarcity can be caused by a variety of factors. Water scarcity can be caused by a physical deficiency (physical water lack of availability), or by poverty and underdevelopment or an absence of sufficient infrastructure to ensure a consistent supply, even in places where water is plentiful (economic water scarcity). Water use has increased at a rate more than twice that of global population growth over the last century, and it continues to rise in all sectors (Islam and Karim, 2019). Droughts will become more common as a result of climate change. Nowadays, over 2 billion people live in countries with severe water scarcity, and the number will continue to rise (Boretti and Rosa, 2019). By 2100, the earth's population will have risen to nearly 8 billion people. Humans must learn to produce enough food without depleting the soil, water, or climate. The biggest hurdle humanity has ever directly confronted has been labelled as this. The remedy is primarily focused on sustainable groundwater management (Jakeman et al., 2016). Groundwater needs to be better understood and managed scientifically, because it can help solve the problem if we seek liable use and sustainment through good governance practices.
19.2. Water, land, energy, and agriculture
Rapid urbanization, the growth of peri-urban areas, and wastewater treatment problems are all adding to the situation's complexity. To limit harmful effects on human health and the environment, it is clear that alternate water sources, suitable water supply methods, and wastewater treatment are needed (Sharma et al., 2017). As the world's population grows, so does the demand for important resources like water, electricity, and land. Innovative spatial-temporal solutions for managing the water-land-energy nexus should be pushed if future human demands are to be satisfied. Remote sensing techniques are progressively becoming more prevalent in efficient and effective of agriculture production related topics like transmission losses, irrigation increased efficiency, farming techniques, pest/disease attack, soil erosion, and moisture patterns, largely owing to the provision of high-resolution spatial data. Infrastructure that is resilient is essential for sustainable water resource management and development (Hutton et al., 2017). Evidence-based measures are needed to get a vital understanding of best practices in water-related architecture.
19.3. Groundwater prospects and geographical settings
Excessive consumption of groundwater is undeniably occurring in isolated areas, and it can have disastrous consequences for communities. The several parts of coastal areas have silky sediment deposits varying ages from Pleistocene to recent, which have resulted in multi-aquifer systems with high potential (Alfarrah and Walraevens, 2018). Groundwater progression from these kind of aquifer systems has a lot of room for growth. Moreover, developing groundwater from these aquifers must be treated with caution, and care must be taken to confirm that resource overexploitation does not result in saltwater water intrusion. As the multi-aquifer systems in coastal areas are likely to have all possible dispositions of fresh and saline waters, it is necessary to take-up detailed studies to establish the saline–fresh water interface and establish the replenishable discharge of groundwater to sea (Hussain et al., 2019). Moreover, the effective implementation of surface water irrigation systems without due regard for ecological sustainability, numerous canal command areas are experiencing water logging and soil salinity issues as groundwater levels gradually rise (Kumar and Sharma, 2020). These areas have a lot of potential for groundwater progression because the shallow water table can be dropped to six meters or more without causing any negative impacts on the environment. The challenges caused by poor water quality in these areas can be remedied by melding them with the accessible canal waters.
Flood plains of rivers are normally good repositories of groundwater and offers excellent scope for development of groundwater. Groundwater levels in these tracts are mostly shallow, leaving little room for accommodating the monsoon recharge, a major portion of which flows down to the river as surface (flood) and sub-surface runoff. Surplus monsoon runoff, which would be wasted, can be captured with careful water resource management in these areas. During the nonmonsoon season, groundwater is controlled removed from flood plains to generate extra space in the unconfined aquifer for later recharge/infiltration during the rainy season (Greene et al., 2016). The second instance occurs more frequently in rivers with irregular flows; the loose sediments in the flood plains are more or less concentrated, culminating in a shallower groundwater level (Ahuja and Tatsutani, 2009). During the nonmonsoon period, the massive pull-out of such flood plain aquifers generates adequate space in the groundwater reservoir, which is refreshed by the river during the raining season.
19.4. Advancement in groundwater data
The gravity recovery and climate experiment (GRACE) satellite, begun in 2002 by NASA, is the only one that expressly evaluates variation in water column by assessing monthly mass changes. GRACE does not differentiate between snow, surface water, soil moisture, or groundwater, instead depending on other data to figure out which portion is related to groundwater variations (Neves et al., 2020). GRACE has made it possible to comprehend evolving water budgets on a global level (Frappart and Ramillien, 2018). Since 1982, groundwater changes have been measured at 30 to 120 m spatial resolutions every 16 days using satellite data. The composite image contains the value of these data: vegetation index, land surface temperature, and a normalized difference water index.
Research team from Hamburg University compiled the global river chemistry dataset (GLORICH), which contains different water quality parameters for river locations throughout the world (Thorslund and van Vliet, 2020; Hartmann et al., 2019). This information is open to the public and can be retrieved as a zip file from PANGEA. 1.27 million samples of major compounds, nutrients, carbon species, and physical and mechanical properties are included in the dataset. For all stations that met our eligibility criteria, we retrieved Specific Conductivity data (another term for EC) from the ``hydro-chemistry'' csv file and teamed it with station relevant data (``Sampling locations'' file).
The global groundwater information system (GGIS) is a web-based immersive portal for groundwater-related knowledge and information (https://groundwaterportal.net/global-groundwater-information-system). The system's main goal is to aid in the collection and analysis of data on groundwater resources, as well as the communicating of that data among water experts, decision makers, and the general public. Transboundary groundwater, global country data, project related information, managed aquifer recharge, small islands, and groundwater monitoring are among the modules/viewers currently available in the GGIS. The groundwater spatiotemporal data analysis tool (GWSDAT) is a user-friendly, open-source software application for visualizing and interpreting groundwater monitoring data (https://www.api.org/oil-and-natural-gas/environment/clean-water/ground-water/gwsdat). It also allows for the use of other forms of monitoring data gathered over time and space. The FREEWAT platform combines the geographical data evaluation power of GIS geo-processing and postprocessing tools with process-based simulation models. The FREEWAT environment supports the storage of large spatial datasets, data management and visualization, as well as the execution of distributed modelling codes (mainly belonging to the MODFLOW family) (Rossetto et al., 2018).
19.5. Opportunities of sensor
Satellites can now provide a repository of imagery that spans centuries. These historical records enable us to spot trends and patterns in various aspects of watershed management, including water supply, water conservation, and crop production. Information gathering costs are being drastically reduced thanks to recent advancements in water technology. Groundwater tracking needed comparatively expensive equipment and practitioners to acquire and interpret data until recently, leaving private citizens unaware of groundwater conditions and unable to appropriate measure with groundwater challenges. Cost-effective sensors and meters are being developed as a result of technological advancements, allowing private citizens access. Wellntel offers meters that record groundwater levels (supply) and cranking for a reasonable price (between $800 and $1200). One of the most important aspects of Wellntel's approach is that the data is not only obtained, but also addressed for the user: the data is sent directly to the cloud, where individual citizens can access it.
Remote sensing is extensively used to offer this implicit hydrogeological information, acquiring data on factors including geology, geomorphology, drainage patterns, vegetation, and land use owing to the absence of high permeability capacity (Agarwal et al., 2013). Thematic maps were generated using remotely sensed data, GIS, geophysical techniques, and ground-truth data to demarcate groundwater potential zones (GWPZ) and monitor groundwater vulnerability. Multi-spectral (enhanced thematic mapper (ETM)) and spatial (shuttle radar topography mission (SRTM)) data, radar technology, and thermal surveys are used in remote sensing for groundwater monitoring. Apart from radar and geophysical methods, most Earth Observation sensors do not permeate the earth's surface. Senay et al. (2012) used one of their models that required land surface temperature. This was calculated using data from the moderate resolution imaging spectroradiometer's thermal band (MODIS). Due to the capillarity in the soil zone, through which groundwater can float to the surface and modify the soil moisture content, reflectance, and scattering attributes can represent variability in groundwater levels (Huo et al., 2011). The tropical rainfall measurement mission (TRMM) microwave imager (TMI), the advanced microwave scanning radiometer (AMSR) satellite systems, the soil moisture ocean salinity (SMOS) mission and soil moisture active passive (SMAP) mission, as well as multiple other synthetic aperture radar (SAR) series, have all been deployed over the years (Jackson, 2002).
19.6. Advancement of space technology
Satellite remote sensing is becoming more widely used as a supplement to in-situ monitoring networks, and in some cases, it is the only feasible option. And almost all elements of the hydrological cycle can now be measured directly and indirectly using satellite-based sensors (McCabe et al., 2017). From the few early committed operations that concentrated on snow extent and land cover to the existing continuous monitoring of nearly all elements of the water balance and vegetation health, satellite data of dependent variable for water management and hydrological hazard controlling has improved markedly. Hydrometeorological and agricultural monitoring networks are often meagre and have a long latency in several regions, attempting to make real-time decision-making extremely difficult (Sheffield et al., 2018). As a result, remote sensing sensors are capable of delivering key information for water management and monitoring the progression of hazards and their effects (van Dijk and Renzullo, 2011). Satellite data also allows for risk evaluation in the context of regional water security, food production, retrieval, and trade, kudos to its extensive coverage (Dalin et al., 2017). The EUMETSAT satellite application facility on land surface analysis provides a number of products for Europe (MW, IR, and MW-IR merged precipitation; MW-based soil moisture; VIS/IR-based snow cover extent; and MW-based SWE) that are directed specifically at operations and maintenance hydrology and WRM (EUMETSAT, 2018).
19.7. Water treatment technology
Water treatment technological improvements have the opportunity to boost a variety of industries by increasing water efficiency and addressing concerns like ageing infrastructure, sustainable development, and smart water. Numerous water users, primarily utilities, are risk averse and hesitant to be early adopters of new technologies, which poses a significant dilemma for water treatment technology (Torresen, 2018). Moreover, the negative consequences (deteriorated water quality, lower groundwater levels, saltwater interferences, and so on) of untenable groundwater pumping, rising demand, regulatory issues, and more extreme weather events as an outcome of a warming climate are pressuring infrastructure to innovate out of necessity.
To achieve such a lofty goal, creative business models have been developed that incorporate various treatment technologies to make water fit-for-purpose in regards to quality, thereby enabling more freshwater resources while lowering treatment costs for nonpotable uses. Transitioning toward a fit-for-purpose treatment model necessitates legislative changes and the development of legal standards for what makes up ``fit'' for various applications, such as potable water quality thresholds and benchmarks. Establishing new technology is frequently accompanied by the adoption of new business models. Public-private partnerships (P3s) can help utilities resolve enhanced regulations, enact conservation and efficiency programs, and adjust to diminished public funding by facilitating the implementation of innovative business models and accumulating innovations.
There is a massive business opportunity, and facilities are being bombarded with providers of emerging technologies, forcing them to either overlook them or spend in determining how well they fulfil their needs. Most utilities cannot avail to take the risk of adopting new, untested technologies that may not produce the savings claimed or fail to meet regulatory requirements. It would be beneficial if a third party, including a private or nonprofit organization, streamlined and vetted the plethora of technologies. As part of the integrated conversation between utility services and industrial applications, this third-party entity could also recognize gaps and needs for technological advances, primarily ensure that the innovations are achieving a precise need. In addition, training staff to use emerging innovations costs the utility time and money. The upfront costs of implementing new technologies could be limited if the utility sector pooled its knowledge.
19.8. Integrating monitoring network
Groundwater resource problems are usually associated with long-term effects. Monitoring may offer essential data for characterizing, analyzing, and recording changes in aquifers, which can help us better understand the complexity and uncertainties connected with groundwater resources (Mogheir et al., 2006). The majority of data on changes in groundwater quantity and quality is dispersed, and important characteristics (such as heavy metals and organic matter) are even absent. Scientists and stakeholders have insufficient evidence to ensure that resources are used efficiently and the environment is adequately safeguarded. Under these circumstances, an interconnected network for analyzing the physical characteristics (e.g., temperature and water levels) as well as the chemical composition of groundwater and surface water bodies is urgently needed (lakes, rivers, and drains). The groundwater management method should focus on impurities in drinking water such as nitrate, fluoride, arsenic, and heavy metals. It's just as vital for rural communities to have clean drinking water as it is for city dwellers. Additionally, the variance in chemical components in restricted aquifers should be given more attention, and groundwater pumping should be strictly supervised, particularly near the two water cones.
When designing a monitoring network for groundwater quality and quantity, there are two key characteristics that differentiate groundwater from surface waters that must be taken into account (Little et al., 2016). The padding of observation wells in the groundwater quality network will be determined by the strategic approach for distinguishing between diffuse and point pollution stations, national and regional stations, and disparities between principal, specific, and temporary networks. According to Tuinhof et al. (2002), a monitoring network consists of a set of observation wells and a predetermined quantity of extraction wells. In addition, a ground-water monitoring program comprises both a quantity and a quality network (groundwater level and recharge rates). These networks must be optimized based on current and future requirements, as well as accessible financial resources.
The early warning system (EWS) must be attributed to the change in the groundwater system as groundwater is a dynamic system. The EWS may be used to evaluate sustainable abstraction quantities, development viability, and groundwater management strategies. The availability of data on fluctuations in water level and water quality in the surface water–soil–groundwater system, on the other hand, is one of the most important drivers of the EWS's effectiveness. The global groundwater monitoring network (GGMN) is a web-based participatory approach of networks created to enhance the performance and availability of groundwater monitoring data (https://ggis.un-igrac.org/view/ggmn) and, as a result, our understanding of the state of groundwater resources. GGMN is a UNESCO initiative that is being executed by IGRAC with the help of many global and regional relationships.
19.9. Strengthening scientific support
Groundwater management's ultimate goal is to provide a sufficient amount and quality of water for human health, livelihood, and productivity. Water resources, ecosystems, and water security are the three main components of modern management paradigms. Groundwater management is hampered by the need to bridge the theoretical and practical divide. As a result, the interactions between different bodies of water are poorly understood. Additionally, new technologies in the areas of water conservation, groundwater pumping, information collecting, and contaminant transport modeling are difficult to apply due to a lack of groundwater expertise. Scientific research should be devoted toward better explaining, communicating, and educating water managers and decision makers in these circumstances (Li, 2016).
By enabling a clear understanding of hydrological processes, evaluating the consequences of anthropogenic activities on the quality and variety of groundwater, enlightening the function of groundwater in the eco-environment, and delivering a holistic perspective, science can contribute to the resolution of conflicts, including those between groundwater development and preservation points of view. Groundwater management that is sustainable requires not just outside expertise and university assistance, but also the help of internal professionals. To determine the geographical and temporal distribution and movement of pollution in the aquifer system, modern technologies and modeling techniques should be introduced and utilized, particularly in drinking water protected zones, landfills, industrial parks, and mine sites. Concerned departments should provide professionals greater opportunity to improve their technical expertise through frequent education and training.
Global map of irrigated areas (GMIA) plots the percent of total area equipped for fertigation in 2005 on a raster with a spatial resolution of 5 arc-minutes (https://wbwaterdata.org/dataset-/global-map-of-irrigated-areas-gmia). Supplementary map layers show the percentage of irrigated agriculture that was definitely used for irrigation, as well as the percentages of irrigated land that was cultivated with groundwater, surface water, or nonconventional water sources. The global groundwater information system (GGIS) is a web-based interactive portal for groundwater-related knowledge and information. The GGIS is made up of several modules that are organized around different themes (https://www.un-igrac.org/). Global groundwater data by aquifer and country decentralization, global groundwater stress (based on GRACE data), and global groundwater quality data are among the data sets. India-WRIS aims to raise public and stakeholder awareness of the current state of water resources and the need for efficient management by enticing them to participate in achieving the overall goal of water security (https://indiawris.gov.in/wris/#/). New technologies such as GIS and remote sensing, combined with domain expertise in water resources, have proven to be effective in asset mapping, evaluation, and management strategizing. This involves data collection from a variety of sources, standardization, and storage of the complete gamete of data on a national scale.
19.10. Encouraged public engagement
The concerned with establishing efficient and productive interactions in order to achieve a shared understanding of goals or a mutual commitment to change is referred to as participation (Curtis et al., 2016). To encourage community participation, a variety of processes and models are employed. The public is actively involved in the development and execution of groundwater management programs. Contributing to collaborative research programs as a social researcher has had numerous advantages. Our awareness of ecology and hydrogeology, as well as the guessed links between property management and environmental consequences, has improved as a result of regular and structured interactions with scientists. Because public access to information on groundwater conservation and preservation is constrained, there is no effective way to promote public awareness of the need for groundwater protection (Jie et al., 2018). Efforts should be made to increase public involvement, which is beneficial for monitoring industrial and agricultural operations, along with improving water conservation in urban and rural regions using water-saving methods like spray and drop irrigation. Information transparency should be preserved for simple access to information and data related to the usage of and potable water in aquifers, typically via a web service or a newsletter. In addition, improved public knowledge is needed to implement water-saving measures and pollution-prevention initiatives in both urban and rural regions.
19.11. Future planned and conservation strategy
NOAA and NASA are collaborating on a new polar-orbiting operational environmental satellite system called JPSS. In the VIR spectra, the sensor measures in 22 bands. Based on the band wavelength, the spatial resolution varies between 375 and 750 m. LST and ET retrievals, as well as vegetation characteristics like fPAR, leaf water content, and LAI, and snow cover products, are all relevant. For example, based on Hain et al. (2017), a global 400-m VIIRS-based ET product is being developed, starting with regional data sets for the Middle East/North Africa, the United States, and Brazil. Through continuous spectral sampling of the VNIR and SWIR regions, numerous hyperspectral imaging missions are scheduled or suggested, which can improve lookup of snow and vegetation attributes, as well as bring new water quality and soil property products. At nadir and revisit times of 19 and 5 days, respectively, NASA's proposed HyspIRI has an imaging spectrometer evaluating from the VSWIR range in 10-nm consecutive bands and a multispectral imager assessing from 3 to 12 m in the TIR range with 60-m resolution. The German Space Agency's EnMAP mission (Guanter et al., 2015) is a hyperspectral imager that operates in the spectral range of 420–2450 nm, with bands of 10–40 nm width, at 30-m spatial resolution, and a revisit time of at least 4 days, with prospective research implementations in crop and forest monitoring, inland and coastal waterways, and soil science, among others.
Research and collaboration: By participating in the research that intersects sectors and disciplines, and by adjusting study goal that can be assigned to different problems, scientists in academia and the wider research community have the opportunity to put some of the future research around groundwater resources. The majority of data is presently used to illustrate where groundwater is diminished or has a negative impact on land surface. Academics can use data to measure progress and prospects, such as suitable groundwater recharge sites. Universities could let concerns drive research agendas and engage in more collaborative, implemented client research. By offering alternative approaches, researchers could play the role of interventionists. It is encouraging to have a focal point for dealing with problems. Arizona State University collaborated with the Earth Genome Project to develop a tool that equates the cost effectiveness of using fallow farmland for flood recharge. These kinds of tools have the potential to be ramped across the country and/or developed globally. Research could reveal how to better arrangement assets to define water conservation and economic career progression. Defining the most valuable use of land, such as converting an unviable piece of cropland into a solar farm that produces energy for the farm while conserving water that would otherwise result in a lower return. Academic institutions have the ability to form inventive collaborations with both the public and private sectors. These alliances provide an ability to build relationships and encourage future collaborations.
Organic combined efforts can be quick and effective, but they must be supported by a regulatory framework to ensure their long-term viability. Many successful ensembles are the result of a few key people's leadership; moreover, enshrining relationships can help ensembles survive personnel changes. Dedicated funding streams for cooperative relationships should be part of the institutionalization process. When it comes to establishing stringent regulations, the challenge is to find the sweet spot that approach was undertaken while enabling for process flexibility. The disadvantage of formalizing collaborations is that these organizations are slow to adapt to technological advancements and new revolutionary practices that allow for goldilocks extensibility.
Awareness and messaging: Groundwater messaging should create intelligent sense to people who are not familiar with the subject. To confirm that the relevance of groundwater was conveyed clearly, was pertinent, and appeared from a reliable source to various sectors, the messaging campaign around sustainable groundwater management had to meld the key messages with relevant messiahs and visualizations. Industrial partners can effectively communicate the magnitude of the problem. Slogans like ``One Water'' are useful for communicating complex ideas to the general public. The public will not comprehend where their water comes from or how different water sources are intertwined if the message is not clear. Social media could be used to educate young people about groundwater as well as the interconnected nature of water. Evolving regulations that impede integrated water management will be required to move toward a multifaceted ``One Water'' strategy.
Data acquisition from satellite and sensor: NOAA and NASA are collaborating on a new polar-orbiting operational environmental satellite system called JPSS. One of the components on the JPSS is the VIIRS. VIIRS is a daily time series of multispectral data based on AVHRR and MODIS that has implementations in energy and water balance, vegetation interactions, land cover land use change, and the cryosphere. LST and ET sequences, as well as vegetation criteria like fPAR, leaf water content, and LAI, and snow cover products, are all relevant. For instance, based on Hain et al. (2017), a global 400-m VIIRS-based ET product is being developed, starting with regional data sets for the Middle East/North Africa, the United States, and Brazil. NASA's proposed HyspIRI has an imaging spectrometer measuring from the VSWIR range in 10-nm contiguous bands and a multispectral imager measuring from 3 to 12 m in the TIR range with 60-m resolution. The sensor is used to derive the information on snow retrieval, vegetation monitoring, and ET (Lee et al., 2015). The EnMAP mission (Guanter et al., 2015) is a hyperspectral imager with a spectral range of 420–2450 nm, 30-m spatial resolution, and a revisit time of at least 4 days, with potential research applications in crop and forest monitoring, inland and coastal waterways, and soil science. With intended missions like the joint US-Indian NASA-ISRO Synthetic Aperture Radar (NISAR) polar-orbiting mission, SAR sensors will be used to estimate groundwater through small differences in surface topography. This will use an L-band and S-band SAR to deliver meter-scale land surface height retrievals that can document in groundwater storage (Sheffield et al., 2018).
19.12. Conclusion
Remote sensing has the potential to improve hydrological forecasts by updating key parameters. Remote sensing can provide data needed to initialize predictive model (e.g., soil moisture, snow, and river levels/discharge), and several research has demonstrated the perks of revamping hydrological forecasts (Lü et al., 2016), especially in snow-dominated and dry areas of the planet (Shukla et al., 2013). The most enticing way to use satellite data for groundwater management is to combine it with in situ data and hydrological models. Socialization of soil moisture data into hydrological models can enhance soil water, ET, and streamflow predictions (Ridler et al., 2014). The use of actual ET estimates based on remote sensing to confine hydrological models can also enhance computer models dramatically (Roy et al., 2017). Satellite-based gridded products can benefit from the interconnection of in situ data from meteorological networks (Chaney et al., 2014). With just a few gauges, bias modification of satellite-based precipitation can drastically enhance hydrological conjectures (Serrat-Capdevila et al., 2014). Over the last few decades, climate forecasting has improved in terms of technical ability and resolution to the point where it can now provide some consistency in areas with sturdy teleconnections to sea surface temperatures, and at spatial resolutions (order of 1–10 km) compelled for decision-making. For instance, dynamical climate model estimates of the El Nino–Southern Oscillation are now outpacing statistical projections (Barnston, 2012), and there is conceivable for proficient global climatic forecasting in the tropics and subtropics (Kumar et al., 2013).
One of the most difficult tasks is to provide services that allow users to access and use the massive amounts of data engendered by current and planned missions. The Sentinel-1 satellite delivers about 1 TB of raw data per day, equating to 10 PB (1016 bytes) over the mission's long lifespan (Wagner et al., 2009). When deduced data sets for variety of applications (hydrological, water resources, cultivation, health, and so forth) are incorporated, the number grows even larger, posing a logistical and computational dilemma that is likely beyond the scope of any single data facility. To address these challenges, high-performance computing, which includes supercomputing, cluster computing, and distributed/grid computing, is obligated. However, despite the massive strides in the stipulation of data management and visualization tools by data centers, classical infrastructures at scientific government entities are out of scope for the number of customers. Cloud computing which provides ``pervasive, convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool of configurable computing resources,'' are probably to be the alternative (Mell and Grance, 2011).
Amazon's Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2), which is usable via Amazon Web Services, Google's Cloud Platform, and Microsoft's Azure are some examples of business pay-as-you-go cloud computing technology. These facilities provide scalable computing infrastructure (e.g., virtual machines like Google's Compute Engine) that requires the user to insert, configure, and run their own processing software, or computing platforms that coherent the software and file system firm the user (e.g., Google Earth Engine). Despite the availability of dependable and scalable access to dispersed computing power, the cost of training users should not be overlooked, particularly for implementations that are not simple parallel computation of subsets of satellite imagery.
Near-real-time retrievals of nearly all elements of the terrestrial water cycle are now possible thanks to satellite remote sensing, despite numerous challenges such as accuracy, consistency, coherency, and efficiency. While much work remains to empower and ability to improve for fetching groundwater, water quality, surface water levels, and river flows, the majority of these lookups are global in scope and at spatial, temporal, and spectral resolutions sufficient to settle hydrological parameters and their interactions with anthropogenic activities. Satellites can offer data in areas where on-the-ground relevant information is scarce, unusable, or inaccessible as a source of real-time information. Moreover, fully realizing the prospective presupposes an insight into the various, independent, supplementary, and contending data products, as well as their functionality for a variety of management applications, such as flood/drought risk evaluation and water availability monitoring. Capacity must be created interested in working with satellite data and translate it into knowledge that can be used to inform decision-making. Moreover, there is still a significant disconnect between the accessibility of these products and their use in decision-making. As a result, there is still a privilege to work more assertively with national stakeholders to fortify capacity to use these remote sensing products, particularly in data-scarce zones, in order to develop remedies and possibilities for natural-hazard monitoring and early warning systems in provision of efficient hazard mitigation policies at the national level.
