Groundwater resources sustainability
Abstract
Groundwater is one of the most important natural resources on Earth. Groundwater systems offer a variety of services to humankind, either by providing water that can be abstracted and used, or by various in situ functions, such as climate buffering and sustaining wet environments. Pursuing groundwater resources sustainability means in fact securing the permanent availability of essential groundwater services for indefinite time. In practice, this requires the following preparatory steps: (1) assessing essential current and potential groundwater services offered by the groundwater system considered; (2) identifying the threats to the sustainability of these services; and (3) selecting appropriate approaches and measures to address and control these threats. Across the globe, present-day groundwater services of many groundwater systems are not sustainable; in some cases due to natural causes, but in the majority of the cases caused by human activities, which hints at options for restoring sustainability under favorable groundwater governance conditions.

24.1. Sustainability and sustainable development
The Earth’s natural resources are essential for human life and development. The biosphere and soils provide food and fibers; subsurface mining resources offer raw materials for construction and all kinds of industrial activities; various natural resources (fossil, renewable, and perpetual) supply energy; while water and fresh air meet physiological and other vital needs of living organisms. In principle, all human activities produce modifications in the natural environment and the state of natural resources. Single individuals usually contribute only very little to such modifications and most people have little or no knowledge of the underlying cause-and-effect relationships. Therefore they tend to remain unaware of such side effects of their activities and in most cases they just take for granted what nature offers. However, the individual contributions to unintended side effects add up and may eventually lead to larger scale depletion of natural resources or other forms of environmental degradation.
Throughout history, there have been eminent scholars who perceived and understood interactions between humans and nature, and who warned the general public on potentially harmful side effects of their activities. For instance, Plato in the 5th century BCE, Strabo and Columella in the 1st century BCE, and Pliny the Elder in the CE 1st century discussed different types of environmental degradation resulting from human activities such as farming, logging, and mining; they also recommended “sustainable practices” that would maintain the “everlasting youth” of the Earth (Du Pisani, 2006). Much later, by the end of the 18th century, Thomas Malthus called attention for the impact of population growth on the consumption of natural resources, stating that uncontrolled increase in population threatened to outstrip food production (Du Pisani, 2006). Around 1800 it was Alexander von Humboldt who revolutionized the way westerners see the natural world, by focusing attention on the interactions between the elements of this world, in his view connected in “a net-like intricate fabric.” Not only did he describe the disastrous environmental effects of colonial plantations (characterized by cash crops, monocultures, irrigation, and deforestation) observed during his travels in Venezuela, he was also the first scientist to talk about harmful human-induced climate change and to explain the environmental importance of forests in terms of enriching the atmosphere with moisture, their cooling effect, and their role in water retention and protection against soil erosion (Wulf, 2015). His ideas inspired Charles Darwin, who in his famous book On the Origin of Species (Darwin, 1859) argued that in the struggle for life between different species or individual living organisms those best adapted to local environmental conditions have the best chances to survive. Twentieth century milestones that have greatly influenced thinking about the environment and natural resources are Carson’s (1953) book Silent Spring, Hardin’s (1968) The Tragedy of the Commons, Meadow’s (1972) Limits to Growth (report of the Club of Rome), and the report Our Common Future [also known as The Brundtland Report, produced by the United Nations World Commission on Environment and Development (1987)]. The mentioned authors and many more pioneers that remain unmentioned here have in common that they recognize the importance of the sustainability of the services offered by natural resources and the natural environment; and that they claim that this sustainability may be threatened by human activities.
The term “sustainability” refers to “a state or condition that can be maintained over an indefinite period of time” (Du Pisani, 2006), or to “a capacity to maintain some entity, outcome or process over time” (Jenkins, 2009, cited by Klarin, 2018). The roots of this concept can be traced back to ancient times, but population growth, increase in consumption after the Industrial Revolution, and the risk of depleting crucial natural resources have in recent times deepened the conviction that these resources need to be used in a sustainable way (Du Pisani, 2006). Some thinkers on the subject go wider and even include the suggestion to abandon the prevailing anthropocentric perspective on sustainability and to redefine sustainability in terms of harmony between all life on Earth (Horton and Horton, 2019).
The term “development” is closely related to the old believe in “human progress, the idea that civilization has moved, is moving, and will move in a desirable direction” (Bury, 1932, Du Pisani, 2006). According to Remenyi (2004, cited by Klarin, 2018), “development is a process whose output aims to improve the quality of life and to increase the self-sufficient capacity of economies that are technically more complex and depend on global integration.”
Since development tends to be inseparable from the exploitation of natural resources, while sustainability puts emphasis on their conservation, it may seem that development and sustainability are to a certain extent conflicting. This conflict was very prominently highlighted in the 1970s by the report Limits to Growth of the Club of Rome:
If the present growth trends in world population, industrialization, pollution, food production and resources depletion continue unchanged, the limits to growth on this planet will be reached sometime within the next one hundred years. The most probable result will be a rather sudden and uncontrollable decline in both population and industrial capacity.
Meadows (1972).
As an outcome of numerous debates on this alarming message, the concept of “sustainable development” has emerged—a compromise between development (or growth) and conservation. It was presented by the report Our Common Future (United Nations World Commission on Environment and Development, 1987; “Brundtland Report”), where it was defined as follows:
Sustainable development is development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.
United Nations World Commission on Environment and Development (1987).
Since 1987 this paradigm has been amply discussed, questioned, and criticized, but also widely embraced, and its interpretation and scope are still subject to evolution. It has been at the heart of many international conferences, congresses, summits, declarations, agreements, and programs of action, both national and international. Among the latter, the United Nations global program on Sustainable Development Goals, adopted in 2015, is prominent (United Nations, 2015). Although before the 1970s development used to be associated mainly with economic growth, sustainable development has become much wider in scope and nowadays deals with the natural environment (natural resources, ecosystems, pollution, and climate); the economy (economic growth, jobs, and living standards); and society (poverty eradication, food security, promotion of equity, gender equality, human rights, peace and justice, etc.). These three main facets of sustainable development (ecology, economy, and society) have become known as the “triple bottom line” (Du Pisani, 2006). Overall sustainable development is pursued by addressing these three “pillars” and striking a balance between them (Klarin, 2018).
24.2. Sustainability of groundwater services
24.2.1. Groundwater services
Groundwater is one of our main planet’s natural resources and under conditions of appropriate use, governance, and management it contributes to sustainable development. People involved in using and managing groundwater need to be aware that groundwater is more than only a source of water to satisfy human needs: in many areas it has multiple functions and provides simultaneously different services. Fig. 24.1 shows common groundwater services, grouped under the four distinct categories of ecosystem services defined by the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (MEA) (2005): (1) provisioning services, (2) regulatory services, (3) supporting services, and (4) cultural services. Note that some of the services require groundwater to be abstracted, while other ones are in situ services.

		Download: Download full-size image
Figure 24.1. Groundwater services and functions.
The services offered vary from one groundwater system to another, depending on their particular properties and setting, such as geology, topography, climatic conditions, hydrogeological characteristics, and hydraulic connection with surface water bodies. Among others, sizeable provisioning services require the presence of an aquifer capable of storing and transmitting substantial quantities of water; while these services can only be sustainable if the aquifer is receiving significant recharge. Regulatory services are controlled by reservoir capacity and properties of the aquifer rock and its overburden. Supporting services such as supply of groundwater to streams, springs, or wetlands are linked to particular combinations of topographical, geological, and hydrological conditions.
It is obvious that within the category of provisioning services competition is likely to occur if the demands for water are high and the quantities of available groundwater comparatively limited. In addition, provisioning services are even conflicting with most of the supporting services. In general, each single human interaction with a groundwater system—in the form of abstraction, drainage, enhancing or reducing recharge, pollution, or otherwise—modifies the state of the corresponding system and tends to affect the services it offers. As long as the capacity to provide essential services is preserved, the groundwater resources are considered to be sustainable. What is included under “essential services” leaves some room for subjectivity in the interpretation of groundwater resources sustainability. In practice, groundwater resources sustainability is predominantly associated with the sustainability of the provisioning services, whether or not taking into account the constraints imposed by the demand to maintain locally relevant supporting and other in situ services.
24.2.2. Potential threats to groundwater services
In recent times, global groundwater has become exposed to immense stress (Mukherjee et al., 2020), which means that in many areas around the world the sustainability of groundwater services is threatened. A brief outline of the main threats is provided in the following sections.
24.2.2.1. Intensive groundwater abstraction
Groundwater abstraction directly affects the hydrological regime of the aquifer concerned. The abstracted flow is initially balanced by depletion of stored groundwater, but on a medium term this storage depletion is gradually being replaced by capture, which is the sum of intercepted natural groundwater discharge and induced increases in groundwater recharge. Depending on the rate of abstraction from the aquifer compared to the potential maximum capture, on the longer term either a new hydrological equilibrium is reached or groundwater level declines continue until abstraction will stop due to physical, technical, or economic exhaustion of the aquifer. Intensive groundwater abstraction may produce a diversity of negative side effects: declining groundwater levels; increasing cost of groundwater abstraction; diminishing or even disappearing spring discharges and baseflows; degradation of wetlands; land subsidence; and intrusion of saline, brackish, or other low-quality water. It may have also positive side effects: by contributing to drainage of water-logged zones, enhancing groundwater recharge and creating more storage capacity for buffering between wet and dry periods.
24.2.2.2. Artificial drainage
Drainage activities with the purpose to evacuate groundwater, either for shallow water-table control or for facilitating activities at greater depth (in particular mining), affect groundwater services in a similar way like groundwater abstraction for any intended water use. Artificial drainage and removal of surface water, either by formal technical drainage provisions or by expanding the areas of impermeable land surface, tend to reduce groundwater recharge.
24.2.2.3. Salinization and pollution
When water in a groundwater system gets salinized or polluted, it may become unsuitable for certain groundwater services. This is evidently a major concern for domestic water supply, but also other services (provisioning as well as in situ services) may become affected.
Several processes may cause water in an originally fresh-groundwater aquifer to become brackish or saline. Some of them have natural causes (e.g., flooding by seawater), while other ones are induced by human action (intrusion of seawater or neighboring saline/brackish groundwater caused by groundwater abstraction; downward seepage of mineralized irrigation return flows; and injection of saline or brackish water).
Causes and mechanisms of groundwater pollution are numerous, and there is a large variation in pollutants. Households, industries, mining, and agriculture produce enormous quantities of waste and wastewater. Fetter (1993) distinguishes six categories of sources of groundwater contamination: (1) sources designed to discharge substances (septic tanks, injection wells, land application of wastewater); (2) sources designed to store, treat, and/or dispose of substances (landfills, open dumps, residential disposal, surface impoundments, mining waste and stock piles, graveyards, storage tanks, incineration and detonation sites, and radioactive waste disposal sites); (3) sources to retain substances during transport (pipelines, trucks, and trains); (4) sources discharging substances as a consequence of other planned activities (irrigation, use of pesticides and fertilizers, farm animal wastes, road salting, percolation of atmospheric pollutants, mine drainage, etc.); (5) sources providing a conduit for contaminated water to enter aquifers (wells, construction excavations); and (6) naturally occurring sources, the discharge of which is created or acerbated by human activity (interaction with polluted surface water, natural leaching enhanced by acid rain and saltwater intrusion).
Natural groundwater pollution, for example by dissolution of arsenic or fluoride, takes place at a very slow pace, thus is unlikely to affect groundwater services in the short to medium term.
24.2.2.4. Climate change and sea-level rise
Significant climate change and associated sea-level rise, predicted to occur during the present century and beyond, will undoubtedly affect the services offered by groundwater systems in the future.
Changes in climate variables are likely to vary prominently between geographical regions, but future patterns are difficult to predict with confidence (IPCC, 2014). Nevertheless, studies show that average temperatures will increase in the majority of the world’s regions and that rainfall is likely to become concentrated more often than at present in showers or storms of high intensity. Higher temperatures usually tend to reduce groundwater recharge and—indirectly—lead to increased groundwater abstraction; both are contributing to higher groundwater development stress. Nevertheless, higher temperatures may enhance recharge in some specific areas, for example, where permafrost conditions are likely to disappear by thaw. Whether more intensive rainstorms will enhance or reduce groundwater recharge depends also on local conditions. Therefore predicting or assessing the impacts of climate change on the groundwater regimes in any particular region should be based on area-specific information and knowledge.
Sea-level rise—by IPCC (2019) estimated to become 0.43–0.84 m over the present century—will affect groundwater systems in coastal regions. Low-lying, unprotected coastal land underlain by fresh groundwater may be flooded by seawater, causing groundwater to become brackish or saline; sea-level rise will lead to a higher risk of flooding. Furthermore, a higher seawater level will cause salt water intrusion to move further inland and endanger fresh aquifer zones that are hydraulically connected to the sea or to coastal estuaries and rivers. Note that climate change—producing thermal expansion of the oceans and melt of glaciers and ice caps—is not the only cause of sea-level rise: groundwater abstraction does also contribute to it (Wada et al., 2010, Konikow, 2011), while storing surface water in reservoirs has the opposite effect (Pakhrel et al., 2012).
24.3. Approaches to pursuing, restoring, or enhancing groundwater resources sustainability
24.3.1. The umbrella: groundwater governance and management
Groundwater systems are exposed both to natural phenomena and to the individual activities and influences of numerous people. Typical characteristics of groundwater systems are their often large size, significant buffer capacity, open access to people living within their horizontal boundaries, and poorly defined groundwater ownership. Human actors may have competing or even conflicting interests regarding groundwater, and several of their activities—even those unrelated to groundwater—may unintentionally affect groundwater systems by negative side effects (externalities). Controlling the groundwater resources optimally and preventing them from being adversely affected by potential threats (as described in Section 24.2.2) is therefore evidently beyond reach of single individuals. Concerted efforts of entire communities, in the form of groundwater governance and management, are needed to pursue groundwater resources sustainability. This idea has spread and gradually gained wider acceptance, in particular during the later decades of the 20th century, after human interactions with groundwater systems had intensified in an unprecedented way, which has fundamentally changed the views on groundwater (Van der Gun, 2019). Groundwater management focuses on the interventions to be implemented in the field, groundwater governance on the enabling framework (laws, regulations, institutions, information and knowledge, policy, and planning) and on guiding principles (Villholth et al., 2018). It needs to be emphasized that assessing and monitoring the local groundwater systems and their context are indispensable for proper selection and design of the management interventions to be implemented, as well as for assessing their effects. Furthermore, awareness raising among stakeholders is essential to gain their acceptance of intended interventions and to enhance their willingness to adopt desired changes in their behavior in relation to groundwater. Governance and management approaches related to a number of key issues on groundwater resources sustainability are briefly described next.
24.3.2. Hydrogeological approaches to defining sustainability limits of abstraction
One of the questions often to be answered by a hydrogeological assessment of a region or aquifer system with renewable groundwater is how much groundwater can be abstracted from it in a sustainable way. Obviously, the hydrological regime of the aquifer system considered provides important guidance toward the answer, but different approaches are in use.
The most simple approach observed to addressing this question is the misconception that the rate of recoverable groundwater would be equal to the mean rate of groundwater recharge. This approach ignores the internal dynamics of the groundwater system and assumes—without proving it—that abstracting groundwater at such a rate (or lower) will be followed sooner or later by a new dynamic hydrological equilibrium. In addition, it does not pay attention to storage depletion and its impacts, nor to any of the nonprovisioning groundwater services. In spite of its inadequacies, this approach is still very popular among hydrogeologists, who use a variety of methods to estimate mean groundwater recharge rates.
Hydrodynamically more correct approaches make use of the groundwater capture concept. As outlined by Theis (1940), water artificially withdrawn from an aquifer is derived from a decrease in storage in the aquifer, a reduction of the previous discharge from the aquifer, an increase in the recharge, or a combination of these changes. The decrease in discharge plus the increase in recharge is termed capture (Lohman et al., 1972). As explained also by Bredehoeft et al. (1982) and by Konikow and Leake (2014), among others, the hydraulic head in the aquifer will continue to decline until the new withdrawal is balanced by capture. The maximum hydrologically sustainable rate of pumping from an aquifer equals the maximum capture that can be produced. The latter depends not only on the mean recharge rate, but also on the specific properties and setting of the aquifer, as well as on the pumping configuration (Van der Gun and Lipponen, 2010).
Safe yield came into use more than a century ago as a term indicating the maximum quantity of groundwater that can be abstracted from an aquifer in a sustainable way. The interpretation of this concept has evolved over time, as described by Alley and Leake (2004). Originally, the concept took the groundwater budget as the only constraint to groundwater abstraction; gradually, however, it was expanded by adding other constraints, such as economic feasibility of pumping, water quality degradation, and water rights. Consequently, Todd (1959) defined the safe yield of an aquifer system broadly as “the amount of water which can be withdrawn from it annually without producing an undesirable result.”
In more recent decades, during which integrated water resources management and more comprehensive approaches to sustainable development have emerged, the external linkages of groundwater systems have come more to the forefront. As a result, many aquifer development and management plans nowadays take also into account the potential impacts of groundwater abstraction on surface water systems, ecosystems, and the environment. Ideally, the full range of identified groundwater services (see Fig. 24.1) is incorporated, as well as any potential negative impacts beyond these services. If the aquifer systems considered have been sufficiently assessed, then numerical modeling tools and capability are very helpful for identifying optimal strategies. They enable to simulate aquifer behavior under different groundwater abstraction patterns and intensities, and to compare the results in terms of performance gains and losses of the identified groundwater services and any other impacts. Selecting in this way a favorite strategy is a multicriteria decision problem, guided by political preferences, thus inherently subjective.
Nonrenewable groundwater resources form a special case. Absence of significant recharge implies that groundwater abstraction from nonrenewable groundwater necessarily produces progressive depletion of the stored water volume, which finally leads to exhaustion. In other words, groundwater abstraction from nonrenewable groundwater is hydrologically not sustainable. Nevertheless, carefully planned exploitation of nonrenewable groundwater may pursue an optimal balance between the needs of the present and the needs of future generations, and in this way it may contribute to overall sustainable development. Al-Eryani et al. (2006) use the expression “socially sustainable use of nonrenewable resources” for cases where the use of nonrenewable groundwater resources is reconciled with the “sustainability of human life.” If the quantities of abstracted nonrenewable groundwater are used to generate an equivalent amount of “manufactured capital,”—which means that the sum of natural and manufactured capital remains constant—, then the designation weak sustainability may apply, a term defined in neoclassical economics (Klarin, 2018, Du Pisani, 2006).
24.3.3. Enhancing groundwater recharge
Groundwater resources sustainability is positively affected by a variety of human interventions and other activities that result in increased amounts of groundwater recharge. Enhanced recharge occurs in some cases unintentionally, for instance, as a side effect of surface water irrigation or changes in land use, by leakage from water pipes and sewers, or by drainage provisions that create storage capacity for receiving recharge that previously would have been rejected. On the other hand, also many activities, approaches, and techniques can be observed that intentionally enhance groundwater recharge, with the purpose to contribute to the capacity and performance of groundwater services and functions. These activities and techniques are referred to under the name “managed aquifer recharge” (MAR). Dillon et al. (2018) report on a worldwide survey on the steadily increasing application of MAR over the last 60 years. The different techniques used include streambed modifications, bank filtration, water spreading, and recharge wells. Recharge provisions range from very small local systems (e.g., using water from roof catchments) to very large schemes that require huge investments and advanced engineering technology (e.g., large recharge dam schemes).
24.3.4. Water demand management
One of the main strategies to prevent or combat groundwater overdraft—and thus contributing to groundwater resources sustainability—is water demand management (Tate, 1999, Savenije and van der Zaag, 2002). It aims at water conservation by controlling or reducing the abstracted quantities of water, in particular through more efficient allocation, conveyance, and use. Various opportunities to economize on water consumption in the water chain are almost everywhere present. For instance, free access to groundwater can be replaced by controlled access (restricted by allocation based on permits) and taxes based on metered abstraction may motivate people to reduce the quantities of groundwater pumped. Losses of water in irrigation conveyance systems or leaking from public water distribution networks—often considerable quantities— may be reduced by technical improvements. More efficient water use can be achieved in the agricultural sector by adopting water-efficient irrigation practices and methods (sprinkler and drip irrigation) and in industry by proper design of all water-using processes. If water scarcity is pressing, production may move into the direction of crops and industrial products that are less water-intensive, while low-value products are abandoned. Households can save water by lower pressure in their water distribution systems, use of low-volume flush toilets, waterless sanitation and other water-saving devices, and, in general, by being keen on avoiding wasting water. For purposes where water quality does not matter, low-quality water may be used instead of water of high quality. Finally, industrial on-site used water recycling, and recycling treated urban wastewater for irrigation purposes may reduce significantly the need for tapping new quantities of fresh groundwater. Awareness programs, legal provisions, taxes, water pricing, energy supply and pricing, subsidies, penalties, and fines are instrumental in pursuing a desired behavior of all stakeholders, including the general public. On a macro-level, local water demands may be reduced by importing water-intensive products (virtual water importation) and by a transition to diets with a relatively low water footprint (Mekonnen and Hoekstra, 2011, Hoekstra and Mekonnen, 2012).
24.3.5. Groundwater quality management
Groundwater quality management covers two main purposes: (1) protection against pollution and (2) remediation of polluted sites or aquifer zones.
Protection has the objective to prevent pollutants entering an aquifer or part of it (Foster et al., 2004). Some of the protective measures are generic in nature, for instance, a ban on selling and using certain harmful chemicals; prohibiting the application of liquid manure to agricultural fields during recharge seasons; implementing adequate sewerage and wastewater treatment provisions; and promoting appropriate well protection practices. Other ones are location-specific and focus on protecting existing groundwater abstraction sites (single wells or wellfields). In between these two extremes in terms of spatial extent are the prevention of seawater intrusion and the migration of other poor-quality waters, and interventions such as spatial planning of land use, which protects certain aquifers or parts of them by a local ban on certain uses and locating the uses with comparatively highest pollution risks in zones where they would do least harm.
Remediation of polluted sites or aquifer zones (Fetter, 1993) deals in the first place with source control: removal of contaminated soil (if feasible), unproperly dumped waste, leaking subsurface storage tanks, or buried drums with hazardous substances. If removal is technically or economically not feasible, then the pollution may be physically contained or hydraulically isolated. Pump-and-treat systems represent a second type of remediation: polluted groundwater is pumped, treated, and reinjected into the subsurface or diverted to a surface water system. Other remediation activities include recovery of light nonaqueous phase liquids (LNAPLs) and in situ bioremediation.
Saline water intrusion and brackish water upconing in coastal areas are usually caused by groundwater abstraction. However, groundwater quality degradation is in the majority of the cases a negative externality of activities unrelated to groundwater abstraction and use, which implies that in such cases there is no direct feedback from polluted groundwater to its polluter.
24.3.6. Adaptation to climate change and sea-level rise
Positive responses to climate change can be subdivided into two categories: mitigation and adaptation. Mitigation addresses the root causes and attempts to reduce climate change, in particular by measures that reduce CO2 emissions, for which global support is markedly on the rise. Adaptation seeks to reduce vulnerabilities to climate change risks and the corresponding potential damage, as well as to benefit from new opportunities climate change may offer. Adaptation can take place at different scale levels, even at the level of single individuals, but it is likely to become more effective if dedicated policies and strategies at national and other aggregated spatial levels are developed and implemented (Lim and Spanger-Siegfried, 2004, EU, 2013). Adaptation in the water sector includes a wide range of aspects, facets, and approaches (Ludwig et al., 2009, Jones, 2011, Treidel et al., 2012). Among others, the uncertainty of climate change predictions needs to be taken into account explicitly as an additional risk in water resources planning and management. Next, the design of water infrastructure can no longer be based on historical hydrometeorological time series of the past, since the assumption of statistical stationarity is not valid any more. Furthermore, the water yielding capacity of many vulnerable water sources around the world is expected to decrease, which will lead to responses such as changes in water demands, substitution by supplies from other sources, conjunctive water management, MAR, and use of nonconventional water sources (desalinated water, recycled used waters). As far as replacement of supplies is concerned, it is likely that many surface-water based sources will be substituted by more resilient groundwater sources. Climate change will in some areas offer new opportunities rather than restrictions, for instance, for expanding agriculture to areas where climatic conditions are changing from unsuitable (too cold) to suitable (warmer) for crop growth.
Adaptation to sea-level rise will include construction or heightening of coastal defense infrastructure. Even if the defense works function satisfactorily and prevent low-lying land from being flooded by seawater, measures are needed to counteract increased risks of seawater intrusion into coastal aquifers.
24.3.7. Environmental management
Most groundwater management interventions are designed primarily with groundwater as an extractable resource in mind, which bears the risk of overlooking and neglecting supporting services and other in situ groundwater functions (see Fig. 24.1). This risk can be controlled by adopting an integrated water resources management approach and linking up with environmental management. Such an approach urges policymakers and planners to consider the trade-offs between the value of abstracted water and the area’s environmental values; or, in cases where the protection of specific environmental values or objects has been declared priority, to deal with environmental criteria as a hard constraint in planning.
24.4. Geographic variation of groundwater resources sustainability
24.4.1. General comments
Geographic variation of groundwater resources sustainability depends on natural and anthropogenic factors. The main natural factors are geology, climate, and geographic setting. These factors, separately or in combination, define variations in features such as size of groundwater systems; their structure in terms of stacked aquifers and aquitards; permeability and storage capacity of individual aquifers; their exposure to sources of recharge; their hydraulic connection with rivers and the sea; their degree of confinement; their vulnerability to pollution; their susceptibility to seawater intrusion and other forms of salinization; groundwater recharge intensity and patterns; mean groundwater residence times; and patterns and magnitude of the evapotranspiration deficit or surplus.
Important anthropogenic factors are groundwater exploitation, deliberate modification of groundwater storage (by artificial drainage or by artificial recharge), land use type and land use practices (influencing groundwater quantity and quality), and the production and management of waste and wastewater. The variations in these anthropogenic factors, combined with those in the natural factors, generate an almost endless diversity of local conditions, with widely divergent rankings on the groundwater resources sustainability scale. The latter ranges from strongly sustainable to indisputably unsustainable, with intermediate ratings such as “sustainability at risk” and “weak sustainability.”
Groundwater resources sustainability is a complex concept incorporating multiple facets and subject to differences in interpretation, depending on the interpreter and the specific local conditions. There is no simple metric to assess it unambiguously. Furthermore, for the majority of the world’s groundwater systems, there is not enough information and knowledge available to classify them in terms of groundwater sustainability. Nevertheless, field observations, case studies, and mapped patterns of relevant variables allow to make some provisional steps toward sketching the geographic distribution of aquifers or zones where current groundwater abstraction regimes are indisputably or most probably not sustainable, or where other factors threaten the sustainability of groundwater services. The results are summarized next.
24.4.2. Groundwater resources sustainability endangered or disrupted by progressive storage depletion
If an aquifer system, exposed to a certain rate of abstraction, is not resilient enough to develop sooner or later a new dynamic hydrological equilibrium, then progressive groundwater storage depletion will take place, until economic, technical, or physical exhaustion follows. The corresponding state of “hydrological overexploitation” or even “mining” (in absence of significant recharge) is the most clearly defined type of unsustainability.
Aquifers with nonrenewable groundwater resources form the most obvious category. There is a lack of consensus among groundwater professionals on the definition of this category. Here, we consider it to comprise aquifers receiving no or only negligible quantities of recharge under current climatic conditions (Margat and Van der Gun, 2013), which implies that their possible exploitation derives water from storage rather than from capture. Fig. 24.2 shows the world’s largest aquifer systems of this type. They include seven large aquifer systems in Northern Africa (Nubian Aquifer System, North Western Sahara Aquifer System, Senegalo–Mauritanian Basin, Taoudeni–Tanezrouft Basin, Iullemeden–Irhazer Aquifer System, Murzuk–Djado Basin, and Lake Chad Basin); two in Southern Africa (Stampriet Basin and Karoo Basin); one in the Middle East (Arabian Aquifer System); and two in Australia (Great Artesian Basin and Canning Basin). All these aquifer systems are located in zones with a dry climate, where negligible quantities of water are available to recharge them. In a large zone in Northern Asia, however, aquifers fail to be recharged because of permafrost soil conditions preventing surplus water to percolate downwards to the underlying aquifers (parts of the West Siberian Basin, Tunguss Basin, and Yakut Basin). Numerous other—usually smaller—aquifers with nonrenewable resources are scattered over the globe, often located below actively recharged aquifers but hydraulically unconnected to these. Although abstracting groundwater from such aquifers (mining) is in a strict sense not sustainable, it may under certain conditions be considered as “socially sustainable use of nonrenewable resources” (Al-Eryani et al., 2006) or qualify as “weakly sustainable” (Klarin, 2018, Du Pisani, 2006). In spite of their lack of hydrological sustainability fed by groundwater renewal, some of these aquifers contain such a large volume of nonrenewable groundwater resources that under current abstraction rates it would require up to tens of thousands of years to exhaust them physically (Richey et al., 2015). The resilience of such aquifers to abstraction thus depends on stored volume rather than on recharge. Policies and management activities aiming to protect the stored volumes in this category of aquifers are still rare, except for the Great Artesian Basin, where rehabilitation projects during the last few decades produced remarkable improvements of the aquifer’s state (Habermehl, 2018). The groundwater resources of that aquifer could be classified as “weakly renewable.”.

		Download: Download full-size image
Figure 24.2. Global sketch map showing natural characteristics that preclude or strongly limit the sustainable abstraction of significant quantities of groundwater.
Based on Margat, J., 2008. Les eaux souterraines dans le monde, UNESCO & BRGM, 187 p. (Margat, 2008); Nijsten, G.-J., Christelis, G., Villholth, K., Braune, E., Bécaye Gaye, C., 2018. Transboundary aquifers of Africa: review of the current state of knowledge and progress towards sustainable development and management. J. Hydrol: Reg Stud. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejrh.2018.03.004 (Nijsten et al., 2018); various climate maps.
Long-term trends of groundwater storage depletion are not only observed in aquifers with nonrenewable groundwater resources, but also in a much larger number of aquifers containing renewable groundwater. Well-known examples are the Californian Central Valley, the Western alluvial aquifers, the Gulf Coastal Plain, and the High Plains in the United States; the Atacama groundwater system in Chile; the Hermosillo coastal aquifer and Guanajuato upland aquifers in Mexico; the upper Guadiana and other aquifers in South East Spain; the Sana’a Basin in Yemen; the aquifers of Iran’s arid plains; the Indo-Gangetic Plain aquifers in Pakistan and India; and the North China Plain aquifer (EU, 2007, Motagh et al., 2008, Custodio, 2012, Konikow, 2011, Margat and Van der Gun, 2013, Scheihing, 2018, Bierkens and Wada, 2019). In addition to these examples, progressive storage depletion is observed in numerous other aquifers with renewable resources, varying from small to large in size. Like most of the aquifers mentioned previously, they are located particularly in parts of the world where dry climates prevail (see Fig. 24.2).
Long-term trends of declining groundwater levels do not necessarily imply that the current abstraction regime is unsustainable. In principle, the aquifer can still be in transition to a new hydrodynamic equilibrium, although the longer it takes, the less probable this will be. The diagnosis “unsustainable abstraction regime” or “hydrological overexploitation” can only be confirmed by local investigations showing that under the current abstraction regime the aquifer’s resilience is insufficient for establishing a new hydrological equilibrium (by reducing natural outflow and/or inducing additional recharge).
Attempts to reduce, stop, or even reverse depletion of renewable groundwater resources can be observed in several countries. The main approaches are reducing groundwater abstraction and augmenting groundwater resources by artificial recharge. Reducing groundwater abstraction is usually very difficult since it requires people to change their behavior and to forgo their currently enjoyed benefits from groundwater use partly or entirely, which is generally conflicting with their personal short-term interests and sometimes with their formal or perceived rights. Successful control of groundwater abstraction is observed only in a limited number of countries, most of them in Europe. The second approach (artificial recharge) is less controversial and usually more successful, but it can be applied only if there is a local source of water available to feed the aquifer system concerned. Total worldwide reported artificial recharge reached 9.9 km3/year in 2015, equivalent to 1% of the global groundwater abstraction. Countries with the largest volumes artificially recharged are India, United States, Germany, Italy, Australia, Spain, The Netherlands, Slovakia, Israel, and China (Dillon et al., 2018). There are also numerous areas and countries where considerable depletion of renewable groundwater resources does occur, but where significant efforts to control it are missing so far.
24.4.3. Groundwater resources sustainability endangered or disrupted by water quality degradation
Fresh groundwater resources endangered by quality degradation are scattered around the globe. If quality degradation is actually going to take place, then after some period of time these resources will be no longer suitable for certain provisioning services, hence will such services not be sustainable. Highest groundwater quality degradation risks are present in those zones where high vulnerability to pollution (or salinization) concurs with high concentrations of potentially infiltrating pollutants (or with the presence of saline/brackish water).
Pollution-related sustainability risks are prominent in shallow unconfined aquifers, at least in parts of such aquifers underneath urban areas or overlain by intensively cultivated agricultural lands. Local sanitation, sewage leaks, and many other forms of wastewater tend to produce below the surface of urban areas zones of polluted groundwater that slowly migrate downward. Groundwater inside these zones is not suitable anymore for uses that require a high water quality (such as drinking water), while neighboring parts of the shallow aquifer (immediately outside the urban area) and fresh groundwater resources in hydraulically connected deeper strata may be at risk as well, depending on the extent to which the migration of pollutants is controlled by natural factors and by human action. Diffuse shallow groundwater pollution under intensively cultivated agricultural land is characterized by other dominant pollutants (fertilizers and pesticides), but its migration follows a similar pattern. The majority of the sources of pollution mentioned in Section 24.2.2.3 are particularly a threat to shallow groundwater resources, but some sources form a risk for deep groundwater resources. Examples of such sources are disposal sites for radioactive waste and other substances stored permanently at great depth, as well as mining activities, and the recovery of oil and gas.
Fresh groundwater resources in low-lying coastal areas have special sustainability restrictions because of their exposure to the risk of saline water encroachment in response to groundwater abstraction, climate change, and sea-level rise. Fig. 24.3 shows global hotspots in this category. River deltas are of particular interest (Coleman, 1981): they usually enjoy considerable fresh-water recharge, but in view of the salinization hazard only a fraction of it can be abstracted sustainably.
Modified from Oude Essink, G.H.P., van Baren, E.S., de Louw, P.G.B., 2010. Effects of climate change on coastal groundwater systems: a modelling study in The Netherlands. Water Resour. Res. 46, W00F04. doi:10.1029/2009WR008719.
		Download: Download full-size image
Figure 24.3. Global hotspots of groundwater vulnerability to sea-water intrusion and sea-level rise.
A model study for the Rhine–Meuse–Scheldt delta in The Netherlands by Oude Essink et al. (2010) predicted the impact of sea-level rise on groundwater heads during the present century to remain limited to areas within 10 km from the coastline and the main rivers, but to produce progressive salinization of shallow groundwater, putting the quantities of fresh groundwater available for provisioning and ecosystem services under pressure. Although other river deltas have their own specific properties, they have in common that the fresh groundwater resources they contain is threatened by salinization, already under current conditions, but even more in the future, due to sea-level rise.
Many of the small islands in the world’s oceans and seas are endowed with only thin fresh groundwater lenses (IGRAC, 2019); their exploitation requires utmost care, in order to avoid groundwater salinization. These islands, in particular the topographically very flat ones such as Tarawa atoll (Kiribati), Malé (Maldives), and Tongatapu (Tonga), are extremely vulnerable to sea-level rise, among others due to the related limited sustainability of groundwater as a source of domestic water.
24.4.4. Groundwater resources sustainability constrained by environmental considerations
Among the various competing or even conflicting groundwater services (Fig. 24.1), highest priority is usually given to provisioning services, often at the expense of environmental and other in situ services. Obviously, very low priority for nonprovisioning services prevails in water-scarce areas of the arid and semiarid zones, where it is already a major effort to provide and secure water in the quantities as demanded for domestic, agricultural, and industrial purposes. This leaves little or no room—physically nor in the mind of people—for allocating water to any of the nonprovisioning groundwater services. Consequently, several in situ groundwater services that used to be available before the onset of intensive groundwater development have nowadays disappeared in most of the severely water-stressed areas of the arid and semiarid zones: groundwater levels have declined, springs and baseflows have dwindled, and wetlands have dried up.
The situation is different in areas more favorably endowed with water resources. People there can to a certain extent afford to make a choice between different types of groundwater services and opt for those they prefer. Nevertheless, a basic understanding of how groundwater systems behave and good coordination between the many stakeholders are required, in order to prevent that the state of the groundwater systems changes in an uncontrolled way, with the risk of undermining the sustainability of the groundwater services opted for. Where these and other elements of good groundwater governance are available, it is a political decision how to balance the different groundwater services in practice. A growing awareness of the value and vulnerability of the groundwater dependent environment, and a steadily increasing appreciation for nature and the environment has in several countries produced a shift in this balance in favor of in situ groundwater services. Environmental targets there have been introduced in groundwater management plans as constraints to groundwater abstraction. Typical examples of such targets are the prevention of land subsidence, the preservation of baseflows and springs, and the conservation of recognized valuable nature areas. Assigning the status of protected area to sites or areas with valuable nature, for instance, in national environmental policies or under international conventions such as Ramsar, contributes to ensuring that environmental protection and nature conservation there gets highest priority.
By October 2019 Ramsar’s (2019a) List of Wetlands of International Importance included 2372 wetlands in 170 countries (see Table 24.1). Together, they cover almost 2% of the Earth’s land surface. Europe leads the list in terms of number of sites, Africa in terms of aggregated area covered. The size of single Ramsar sites varies from 1 ha to more than 60,000 km2. The contracting parties are expected to manage their Ramsar sites so as to maintain their ecological character and retain their essential functions and values for future generations (Ramsar, 2019b).
Table 24.1. Summary of Ramsar site statistics, by October 2019.
Continent
Number of sites
Aggregated area of sites (ha)
Share in total number of sites (%)
Share in total aggregated area (%)
North America
218
23,605,427
9
9
Central America and the Caribbean
75
3,706,034
3
1
South America
129
57,788,677
5
23
Europe (including the Russian Federation)
1092
27,172,150
46
11
Africa
413
110,042,647
17
43
Asia
363
22,118,653
15
9
Oceania
82
9,171,913
4
4
Total
2372
253,605,501
100
100
Based on Ramsar, 2019a. The List of Wetlands of International Importance. https://www.ramsar.org/document/the-list-of-wetlands-of-international-importance-the-ramsar-list.
24.5. Conclusion
Groundwater resources sustainability is a complex concept. It is not an intrinsic property of a physical groundwater system, but rather it combines properties of such a system (including its setting) with current stresses acting upon it. These stresses may be anthropogenic (such as groundwater abstraction or pollution) and natural (e.g., climatic variation). If a groundwater system is resilient enough to continue providing the currently enjoyed groundwater services for indefinite time, then its groundwater resources are rated as sustainable. Often such groundwater services are associated only with groundwater abstraction (provisioning services), but in principle, it is also possible to link groundwater resources sustainability to in situ groundwater services.
As mentioned before, the exploitation of nonrenewable groundwater resources is inherently unsustainable, while the sustainability of renewable groundwater resources is endangered by various potential threats, widely spread over the globe. Most of these threats are related to human activities, which implies that it often lies in the hands of human communities to prevent groundwater services from becoming unsustainable, or to restore groundwater systems of which the services have become unsustainable. Reducing groundwater abstraction, augmenting the groundwater resources, and preventing pollutants from entering aquifers are the most common strategic options. Implementing measures and changing human behavior according to these options is usually very difficult in practice, due to conflicts of interests, poor understanding of the longer term consequences of adverse trends, and the lack of political will and/or institutional capabilities to ensure collective compliance with adopted policies and plans. Furthermore, groundwater governance and management are likely to develop and flourish only under conditions of peace, social stability, and adequate financing.
The enormous and vital importance of groundwater for the human society is beyond dispute. Groundwater plays a major role in supplying drinking water, ensuring food security by irrigation, adapting to climate variability, supporting biodiversity, sustaining surface water bodies, and pursuing poverty alleviation. Stresses on the groundwater systems tend to increase over time. Ensuring groundwater resources sustainability is therefore crucial. Nevertheless, groundwater ranks usually low on the political agendas and relatively few people are aware of groundwater sustainability hazards. As a result, many aquifers or aquifer zones around the world have been lost already by irreversible pollution or show severe groundwater storage depletion, while the sustainability of current groundwater services provided by numerous other aquifers is at risk and thus requires immediate protective action. In this connection a group of scientists and practitioners active in the groundwater sector met recently (October, 2019) at a Chapman Conference in Valencia and formulated a statement on global groundwater sustainability, entitled Global Groundwater Sustainability: A Call to Action (IAH, 2019). The statement urges international and national governmental and nongovernmental agencies, development organizations, corporations, decision-makers, and scientists to support global groundwater sustainability, and it calls for three items of action: (1) put the spotlight on global groundwater sustainability; (2) manage and govern groundwater sustainably from local to global scales; and (3) invest in groundwater governance and management.
